# Introduction

This is a first attempt to accomplish three things in the following order: (1) summarize briefly some of the notable previous work on trust; (2) clarify the relationship between trust and a few very closely related concepts, including psychological safety, familiarity, cooperation and collaboration, reciprocity, prosocial behavior, and altruism; (3) provide a potential alternative information view of trust that have implications for HCI, i.e., designing for trust in computer-mediated environments.

My own interest in trust developed when I was studying the dynamics of self-disclosure (the revealing of personal information to others) in social media. I came across two factors that both affect people's willingness to self-disclose about intimate matters but in distinctly different ways. Both a closer relationship to the target audience {{"wheeless1976self" | cite}} and anonymity {{"ma2016" | cite}} lead to increase in self-disclosure. But in the former case, the person who is self-disclosing made himself/herself vulnerable to the target audience because of trust. On the other hand, anonymity seems to decrease the risks or vulnerability of self-disclosure, but does not indicate the same kind of trust at the target person.

It was from this small realization that I began becoming fascinated by the idea of trust and its fundamental social nature. Take self-disclosure for example, trust allows for the exchange of personal information, which serves as the foundation for building interpersonal relationships, as described by social penetration theory {{"altman1973social" | cite}}. Self-disclosure exposes oneself to vulnerabilities such as social judgment, compromise of privacy {{"bazarova2014self" | cite}}; and the fact that small leaps of trust will lead to a kickstart a series of positive feedbacks that reinforces the mutual disclosure and sense of solidarity is extremely powerful. Extending beyond the exchange of information, trust is ubiquitous in all generalized social exchange processes, which makes it important and challenging to study.

Finally, I think now is an particularly exciting time to study trust because technology has promised ways to better understand as well as intervene on large scale. With the ability to record and collect massive scale detailed social network data, and against the backdrop of increasingly popular technology-enabled sharing economy practices, we can have new data, new ways to conduct experiments, new ways to model trust that can hopefully yield more detailed insights with finer granularity. Beyond understanding, the current technological systems also have faster cycles for implementing and deploying design changes, which could translate understanding we gain about trust into real-world solutions that can help make massive online and offline collaborations more smooth.

Noted that these are all extremely ambitious goals, and the journey of a thousand miles starts with a single step. The first difficulty I personally encountered is the large amount of literature covering trust spread in many disciplines, including sociology, economics, political science, psychology, communication, organization behavior, management, etc. Trust has so many definitions and is often used interchangeably with many closely related concepts, such as faith, confidence, cooeperation, psychological safety. In my opinion, this is a feature, not a bug. Trust is like an infrastructure upon which human interactions of various domains depend on. Nonetheless, it will be useful to map out the relationship of these studies and clarify a few related concepts to provide a map of exploration for anyone interested in the field.

## References
{% references %} {% endreferences %}