# Over- and Undersocialized View of Trust

Early sociology theory attempted to develop grand unifying theories that can explain every single aspect of life, positivism. Against this theoretical backdrop, early literature on trust in sociology had a very philosophical and theoretical flavor.

>Economics is all about how people make choices; sociology is all about how they don't have choices to make.'' -- James Duesenberry

In 1985, Granovetter published the paper *Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness* {{"granovetter1985economic" | cite}} in American Journal of Sociology, in which he discussed concerns for both the "undersocialized" and "oversocialized" account of economic action by neoclassical and reformist economists respectively. The "undersocialized" account of economic action view human actors as atomized-actors, while the "oversocialized" account viewed human actors as overwhelmingly sensitive to the opinions others and hence obedient to system norms and values.

I argue that this divide of under- and oversocialized view also exist in account of trust, and as with economic actions, may be more accurately described as an embedded process with a focus on information. In the following sections, I'll first summarize the literature on trust that fall under each of the two views, and then provide my arguments for the embedded information view of trust.

## Trust and Social Systems

I begin the discussion on the "oversocialized" view of trust literature with the 1979 book of Niklas Luhmann, *Trust and Power* {{"luhmann1979trust" | cite}}. Influenced by the work of Talcott Parsons {{"parsons2013social" | cite}}, Luhmann provided a theoretical interpretation of trust as "a mechanism for the reduction of social complexity" through the lens of systems theory. Luhmann interpreted trust as a functional necessity dealing with great uncertainty and risk that are characteristics of contemporary society. Trust in this context is discussed conceptually as part of an integrated theory envisioned to explain all aspects of social systems.

Following this theoretical generalizing tradition, Bernard Barber, upon observing that the term trust was being used vaguely in daily conversations and other disciplines, set out to delimit the vagueness of the term in his 1983 book, *The Logic and Limits of Trust* {{"barber1983logic" | cite}}. Barber started by clarifying the "meanings of trust" as the expectation of three kinds: 

(1) expectation of the persistence and fulfillment of the natural and the moral social orders; %(breaching experiments by Garfinkel, how disturbing such breaches of trust are about the moral value and social order) 

(2) expectation of technically competent role performance from those involved with us in social relationships and systems; (trust the doctor)

(3) expectation that partners in interaction will carry out their fiduciary obligations and responsibilities, that is, their duties in certain situations to place others' interests before their own. (moral dimension of interaction, power and knowledge)

With this theoretical view of trust, Barber then set out to interpret some empirical phenomena in five different domains: trust in the family (parent-child, spousal trust); in philanthropic foundations; in political systems; in business (inter-firm); and in professions (medical, legal, law, scientists, accounting, and helping).

Although Barber mainly view trust as "expectations that actors have of one another", his primary focus is the relation between trust and social order rather than as individual traits. As he explained, "expectations can be thought of as the basic stuff or ingredient of social interaction", and that "as a sociologist whose primary interest is the construction of usable, empirically based general and systematic theory, I could see that trust, as a dimension of all social relationships, would have to be considered carefully in the light of general theories of social relationships and social systems."

Both Barber and Luhmann viewed trust serving a function within a macro social structure and not from an micro individual point of view. Theoretically and philosophically interesting, neither of them considered proper measures or indicators of trust that could allow for the collection of empirical evidence. Further, even if measures were clearly defined, due to the macro nature of this theory, at that historical time without the aid of wide spread modern web technologies, it was very difficult to collect empirical evidence on such a large scale to support the theory.

## Trust as Psychometric Scales and Behavior Expressions

In 1985, same year as Granovetter's paper on embeddedness was published, J. David Lewis and Andrew Weigert published the paper, *Trust as a Social Reality* {{"lewis1985trust" | cite}} on Social Forces, in which he criticized that "a large quantity of research on trust by experimental psychologists and political scientists...appears theoretically unintegrated and incomplete from the standpoint of a sociology of trust."" Lewis and Weigert pointed out the two-fold gap between these studies and the work of Luhmann and Barber: conceptual and methodological. Conceptually, these studies treat trust as "a psychological event within the individual" {{"lewis1985trust" | cite}}. Methodologically, trust in these studies were reduced to psychometric scaling techniques or behavior expressions in lab settings. I refer to the way that these studies conceptualize trust as the "undersocialized" view of trust.

To better illustrate the undersocialized view of trust and the methodological limitations of reduction of trust both using psychometric scaling techniques and behavior expressions, here I first describe a few examples of such studies from psychology, political science, and economics. 

In 1967, psychologist Julian B. Rotter developed the Rotter Interpersonal Trust Scale (ITS) {{"rotter1967new" | cite}} underlined by the social learning theory. Rotter defined trust as "generalized expectancy that the oral or written statements of other people can be relied upon", which can be learned directly from previous experience or indirectly from communications such as interpersonal conversations or media outlets. ITS consist of [25 items](http://highered.mheducation.com/sites/dl/free/0072563974/87095/ch07.html) using a Likert scale asking whether "most" people including experts, parents, students, repairmen, salesmen and organizations such as United Nation could be depend on regarding their statements. Further, Rotter showed that certain demographic variables are predictive of the high and low trust scores of individuals measured by this scale, which is considered as a personality trait.

Trust studies in political science also mainly used data gathered through psychometric scaling techniques, and frequently from the [World Values Survey](http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/wvs.jsp). For example, the 1974 paper by political scientist Arthur H. Miller, *Political Issues and Trust in Government: 1964-1970* {{"miller1974political" | cite}}, used survey data asking questions such as "How much of the time do you think you can trust the government in Washington to do what is right?"

The limitation of the psychometric measure of trust is revealed with the inconsistency of people's answers to social trust and political trust. In the World Values Survey, social trust is measured by the answer to the question, "Generally speaking would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?". Political trust is measured by answers to relevant questions about the parliament. As political scientist Kenneth Newton wrote, "the evidence suggests that we should not treat trust as a generalized personality trait, but distinguish carefully between social trust and political trust, recognizing that they are neither different aspects of much the same thing, nor necessarily related to each other empirically." {{"newton2001trust" | cite}}.

A segue to the treating trust as a psychological trait are several studies in biology. Trust is shown to be heritable {{"cesarini2008heritability" | cite}}, can trigger enhanced oxytocin levels {{"zak2005oxytocin" | cite}}, and can be enhanced by exogenously administered oxytocin {{"kosfeld2005oxytocin" | cite}}.

In contrast to the psychometric scaling techniques, the alternative measure of trust was behavior expression, widely used by economists in lab settings using numerous variations of the prisoner's dilemma (PD) game. The basic assumption of this measure is the rational-choice theory by James Coleman {{"coleman1994foundations" | cite}}. The most influential one was the trust game developed by Joyce Berg in 1995 {{"berg1995trust" | cite}} published on Experimental Economics. The study showed that rational choice model alone is inadequate to explain all economic behaviors and emphasized the role of trust and reciprocity of human actors in the context of economic decisions. But this does not equate that this economic behavior (collaboration) is a measure of trust, which turned out to be a major source of confusion for a series of later studies.

I argue that the above mentioned studies in psychology, political science, and economics held an "undersocialized" view of trust because the focus as individual traits, beliefs, or strategies for specific actions the actors take as individuals. Though some studies used aggregated measure, such as the studies on trust in political institutions, the authors were not concerned about the role of trust in shaping social structure and order.

## Trust and Generalized Social Exchange Network

The concept trust is fundamentally social, in that it touches upon all aspects of social interaction. I argue that the neither the over- nor the undersocialized view is the most informative to push frontiers on trust forward. The more informative way is to view trust as an attribute of an embedded social exchange network, both influencing and being influenced by the on-going social interactions among actors.

Contemporary social exchange theory was first formulated by Richard M. Emerson by bridging two distinct views represented by George Homans and Peter Blau. In his 1976 paper *Social Exchange Theory* {{"emerson1976social" | cite}} on Annual Review of Sociology, Emerson analyzed and contrasted the psychological behavior focused approach to social exchange by Homans {{"homans1958social" | cite}} and the rational economic actor driven model by Blau {{"blau1964exchange" | cite}}. Emerson provided the middle ground and proposed to focus on social relations as units of analysis {{"emerson1976social" | cite}}. By doing so, Emerson considered social exchange theory "not a theory at all", but rather "a frame of reference within which many theories -- some micro and some more macro -- can speak to one another", which is very much in line of the embedded argument by that of Granovetter.

Social exchange theory extends beyond dyadic exchanges, but is in nature consistent with network analysis. In 1978, Karen S. Cook and Emerson published the paper *Power, Equity and Commitment in Exchange Networks* {{"cook1978power" | cite}} that provided empirical evidence that two structural phenomena, power and equity, constrain social behaviors in an exchange network. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first work that social structure, as theorized by Parsons and Luhmann, was operationalized in experimental studies that provide empirical evidence of structure's constraint on individual behaviors -- the micro and macro link envisioned by Emerson. Later studies following the same view also proved to be fruitful, such as the examining of the effect of group interest structure and on exchange behavior {{"yamagishi1993generalized" | cite}}. Finally, the definition of actors in social exchange theory is also not confided to human actors, but also includes organizations {{"cook1977exchange" | cite}}, as consistent with actor network theory (ANT) of Bruno Latour {{"latour1996actor" | cite}} and the original view of Barber ("with proper caution, it makes sense to talk of the various kinds of expectations and trust that supraindividual systems have of on another" {{"barber1983logic" | cite}}). E.g.: You can trust a news article from certain outlets to be credible; or the quality of a product of certain brands.

It has become clear that the embedded view of trust can offer a frame that reconciles the divide between the over- and undersocialized view. The consequences of such divide was reflected in examples such as the lack of coherence between generalized trust and trust as measured by trust game {{"glaeser2000measuring" | cite}}, the vagueness {{"torche2011trust" | cite}} between "thin" and "thick" trust as defined by Robert Putnam {{"putnam2000bowling" | cite}}, in additions to the many examples with different definitions of trust in many fields as we discussed before.

In my view, two problem remain not fully addressed within this embedded view of trust as part of the generalized social exchange network.

The first problem is the nature of the links between actors. As explained in the paper *Two Approaches to Social Structure: Exchange Theory and Network Analysis* {{"cook1992two" | cite}} by Cook and Joseph M. Whitmeyer, exchange theory and the majority of network analysis work are compatible in the way social structure is conceptualized, but differ in their view on the definition of the link. Exchange theory emphasizes greatly the exchange nature of the links, while network analysis is more relaxed in its definition. And this divide seems not to be a factual one, but a philosophical one, because according to exchange theory, "the very existence of a tie or link, including a communication tie, suggests the existence of interested exchange between two parties." {{"cook1992two" | cite}}

The second problem may be a consequence of the first one, which is the insufficient empirical studies on the role of trust in social exchanges that are not economical. Because rewards are easy to measure in financial terms {{"simmel2004philosophy" | cite}} and reduced to points, most empirical studies, especially experiments on trust, do not reveal insight on how communication, signaling, social grooming, status are linked to the cognitive, emotional, and behavioral dimensions of trust {{"lewis1985trust" | cite}} beyond economic terms.

## Information View of Trust

We have seen that a more coherent account of trust can be developed by raising the level of abstraction of trust from specific domains of human actions such as economics or politics to that of social structure in sociology. Here I argue that perhaps the account of trust may become more coherent if we forgo the focus on human society and raise the level abstraction to *information*.

The practical advantage of the information view of trust is the possibility to integrate definitions, algorithms, and technologies developed in modern computer network security context. A simple search on trust in computer security would yield plenty literature on encryption, cryptography {{"kessler2003overview" | cite}}, certificates, etc. The terminologies such as a trusted node on the network exchanging packets under certain security protocols can enrich our vocabulary in the discussion of sociological trust. We can also study the transmission of trust in a network (if A trust B and B trust C, to what degree does A trust C?). The same way that social network emerged as an interdisciplinary field combining sociology, mathematics and computer science (see the work of Harrison White, Granovetter, Milgram Stanley, Barry Wellman, Duncan Watts and Jon Kleinberg), the information view of trust can be promising in pushing for large scale data to empirically understand trust as a sociological concept, as well as design technical solutions that extend beyond our existing reputation systems.

Second, the information view of trust is theoretically grounded in information theory, whose core concepts compatible with the sociological trust. Information theory {{"cover2012elements" | cite}} is essentially about probability, entropy, and redundancy. These core concepts are compatible with the core concepts such as risk, expectation, and assurance. Norms and traditions could be seen as the base probability of social actors. An information process view of trust can reconcile confusions as whether trust is a trait, a relationship, an attitude, an expectation, or a biological response to Oxycontin. The cognitive dimension of trust can be seen as accepting information input as signals of trust, processing the information gathered, which may be influenced by emotion, forming an expectation, and then producing an behavioral decision output with a state (Finite State Machines) of attitude. Trust determines if there will be an information exchange or not, and is the mechanism of reducing the complexity of the network if the signals are not available to or simply too costly to acquire. This is essentially compatible with the integrated model of trust proposed in 1995 by Roger C. Mayer, James Davis, and F. David Schoorman in the organizational context {{"mayer1995integrative" | cite}}. Reputation systems, which have been studied quite a lot in eCommerce, are systems that aggregate information about the past behaviors of the actors.

Third, the majority of social interactions are depending more and more on information. Information Revolution has drastically changed the way social and economic activities take place. Supported by hardware from landlines to personal computers and today's mobile devices, information systems today underlie all aspects of social life and take place through eCommerce platforms, forums, social media sites, mobile apps, etc. Take social interactions for example, [as of December 2015](http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info), 1.04 billion people use the popular social media platform Facebook to interact with their social ties daily. 
Recent sharing economy practices are more essentially information systems facilitating generalized social exchange. These technological systems, such as Airbnb, Uber, Lyft, etc, collect, aggregate, distribute, allocate, authenticate, and verify information, which could be made or broken by trust.

It is not logical, to ignore the ubiquitous role of information and availability of data in such interactions and constrain the idea of trust of only affecting rigid economic exchange and measuring it only through rough attitude to a simple question, "can most people be trusted". I hope the information view of trust could begin to move more studies about trust to achieve what was envisioned by Barber more than thirty years ago:"I propose, then, not to rely entirely on the somewhat theoretically unsatisfactory empirical work. Nor can I rely heavily on the somewhat general and abstract theoretical work, which often fails to give enough consideration to measures and indicator of its concepts and to the need to collect empirical evidence in terms of those indicators. By combining the two I hope to give the empirically based and theoretically sound study of trust" {{"barber1983logic" | cite}}.

## References
{% references %} {% endreferences %}
